to james: to what degree is anytown a reification of your own theories of the composition of society?
what are the prime papers or sources that you use to think about your goal? 

how do you characterise the games you want to be able to make or experience, but currently can't?

I think of games simulated from a middle level, bi-directionally instead of bottom up or top down. Social interactions of a level of complexity that physical violence is able to take the centre focus.
Social interactions that can form the society around it. A balance of politics, norms, and symbolic actions that complex structures can be the focus.

to what extent could you retrofit democracy 3's model into anytown?





Nail: My attempt to integrate the lessons of BOD, a methodology with those of ABL, of a language and a realisation of need for real-time feedback on an agent, 
with the addition of CiF's reasoning layer style of engine, and Versu's ability to treat facts as trees?

instead of authoring a large static document, much better to have a live authoring environment, that provides feedback of what your system is currently doing. Stochastic exploration and assertion of the potential fact, action,
norm, institution structure, and other states. 

anxiety as a measure of social conformance for modification and change of institutional structures? as fligstein describes?


neural nets applied to FFT: really do this. convolutional neural net, repeated on itself a number of times to essentially amplitude (could frequency work?) modulate the signal. 

an FFT of social behavioural signals instead of frequency, what would that look like? what is the domain transformed into?


Activity theory pyramid, but also the hierarchy of activity, action, and impulse. attempting to move something that was an activity to be come as easy as an action.
metasteam: subject: the player. tool: steam. object: a library of games. outcome: playing a game. 
Steam, as a tool for the selection, rather than purchase of large numbers of games, is somewhat lacking. My own vignette demonstrates how finding a game is not necessarily an easy, straight forward thing to do.
browsing, navigating, and selecting from a large selection of games is trivialised as previously there was a limit on how much media was available at your finger tips. 
with cloud services that can provide a vast collection of media, beyond  what any private library would have been able to hold at any point in human history, means that we need better navigation techniques.
at the moment it remains a structured search because sometimes, due to economics, there are times what you don't want to buy a new game. You want to play one of a vast number you, 
or possibly your ancestors DRM'd library in the steam/netflix/amazon/apple library where you own the item in question. 
think of what a society might look like, when robots have taken over producing jobs, and people are left with a purely social currency of the items of media that they own.


display the asserted but unused facts, tested for but unasserted, and the asserted and tested for facts, in separate groups, in both the parents of conditions,
and the children of actions, to promote things that need to be created. colour by how much is in there, specifying your own colour scale domain. 

metasteam needs a search, and a reasonable depiction of a game page. preferably still something faster than booting up the steam store page. could download the page and keep the images?
downloading already... i'll look into scraping for the images. 
buttons to youtube, and look into downloading from a twitter timeline to annotate tweets that were timed during when a game was being played. 

having a small number of guaranteed users, will let me work with them to debug the installation.

extending metasteam's visualisations only requires d3, the datastructure, and a file that implements the three methods. + the metasteam general definitions.

intro. main stats, circle pack game tags. pie game tags. release timeline. playtime calendar. Multiplayer populations. co-occur matrix of tags by game. 

need a game visualisation method of hub, or any other standardised method for everything to call. 




need to start authoring. simple institutions.
simple institutions like what?
war, physical violence and enforcement. punishment.
physical good production
bartering
social events. a funeral. a celebration.



hierarchies of order. why would you obey the non-physical, non-violent punishments of boarding school?

load in other data structures like cif rules or anytown classes to construct a starting tree? add in democracy values and institutions?


social reinforcement in all areas. promote the values, items, actions, people etc that you agree with for some reason, or like, or if it reminds you of something you like, to
varying strengths.

speaking of which: the automatic balancing of comparisons to begin with is something i should test more fully.

be creating structured filters. when displaying a list by search or by inference, be able to add a series of conditions to filter by. then showing other categories.
so (for parents and children):
specified elements: x
                    y
                    z
assertedButUntested:(xyz) + a
untestedButAsserted:(xyz) + b
testedAndAsserted  (xyz) + c


how do i create new macro classes? copy to a temporary description, edit to abstractness, save as template, instantiate where needed with annotations for reconnections.
