* Discussion on Various different examples of interesting behaviour

** Abnett

*** Legion:
His journey along the dark chute had provided him with almost enough time to complete his identity immersion. He was no longer Konig Heniker. He was D’sal Huulta. In all, he had taken very few real measures to disguise himself: a wrap of pink silk over his desert suit, felt shoes in place of the army boots, a desert shawl expertly pulled around his head. His skin was tanned, though not as dark as the average Nurthene, and a strict Nurthene observer of the Pa’khel would have worn his hair tied in a net under his shawl, and anointed his scalp, armpits, groin and belly with scented oil.

Grammaticus never went to such extremes, even though his Imperial spymasters recommended he should. He knew that his mind was more than capable of smoothing over most epistemological blemishes. Besides, the anointing oils smacked of a ritual offering to the Primordial Annihilator, something he was not prepared to undertake.

He fastened the hooked knife worn by all Nurthene to his under-belt, then strapped on the broad over-belt with its three pouches for fluid, mineral salt and currency. He washed his hands in the trackside dust to blacken his fingernails. Apart from the knife, he carried no weapon, except, of course, for the ring.
The faience tiled walls of the port city glimmered around him in the morning sun, showing reeds and reptiles in mosaic. The Nurthene had no street names, just pictorial emblems. He looked at a particular symbol, a great monitor lizard delineated in cherry red tiles, and knew, with a trained certainty, that he had never seen it before. He’d made a wrong turn. Mon Lo was so complex, so interwoven, it was hard to recall the specific plan. It was like Arachne’s web; mousy, big-bosomed Arachne.

He was the needle, he fancied, her needle, moving through the net of fate.

He halted and took a moment to consider. His internal compass was out. He checked with the rising sun and established where east was. He slowed his breathing, and allowed himself to perspire for a minute, just to stabilise his body. He had his bearings again. He’d just gone a street too far west, that was all. Kurnaul district was over to his left.

Except it wasn’t. He halted again, refusing to allow panic to dig in.

A water-carrier came up to him and offered a ladle of water.

‘No, thank you,’ Grammaticus said. ‘God love you anyway,’ the carrier replied, moving on.

Grammaticus shuddered. What the water-carrier had actually said literally translated as, The Primordial Annihilator immolate your living soul.

*** Bonners Reach

Two Vigilants awaited them at the gate.

‘You ready with the tribute?’ Preest whispered.

‘The servitors have been instructed,’ Ravenor replied through Mathuin’s mouth.

The Order of Vigilants administered the Reach. They collected tariffs, saw to the station’s smooth running, and to the congress of fair trade. The pair that now approached them were lean and tall, at least as tall as Harlon or Zeph. They walked with an easy, nimble step that told Nayl right off they were consummate close fighters. Each Vigilant wore a sleeveless, antique gown of ribbed armour, marvellously constructed, baggy black pantaloons that were tight-cinched at the ankle, and black felt slippers that were shaped around the big toe. Their exposed arms were either bionic, or encased in some form of skinplant technology. It was a tech-design neither Nayl nor Ravenor had ever seen before. Sheathed over their shoulders they carried ceremonial hand-and-a-half swords.

Their heads were bare and shaved. More of the curiously-wrought skinplant tech encased their necks, so that their heads seemed to be resting on slender columns of intricately inscribed metal. The skin of their faces and scalps was entirely covered in swirling flame tattoos, echoing the design around the doorway. Their eyes were augmetic implants that glowed a dull green.

‘Welcome,’ said one. Its voice was like silk.

‘The immaterium has brought you to Bonner’s Reach,’ said the other, its tone rasping and deep.

‘Free trade is welcome here,’ uttered the first.

Perched on her hovering platform, Preest bowed. ‘Thank you for your greeting and welcome,’ she said. ‘I most humbly crave admittance. I have brought a tribute for the welfare of all.’

‘Let us examine it,’ said the rasping one.

At a signal from Nayl, the servitors brought forward the caskets and opened some of them. Foodstuffs, much of it stasis-fresh, wine and some flasks of amasec.

‘This is acceptable tribute,’ said the rasping Vigilant.

‘Welcome,’ repeated the silky one. ‘Do you wish us to advertise your presence and identity to the merchants here?’

‘I am Shipmistress Zeedmund. Of the sprint trader Tarnish. I am here for Firetide, but I also seek interesting commerce.’

‘Zeedmund. Tarnish…’ they echoed.

‘I have serious collateral,’ she added. ‘Make that known. I am interested in genuine business.’

‘You appreciate the Code of the Reach?’ asked the Vigilant with the silk voice.

‘Peace and discourse,’ Preest replied. ‘And no weapon within the bounds of the Reach with a range longer than a human arm.’

Nayl and Mathuin dutifully displayed the empty holsters at their hips, the ritual sign of unarmed intent.

‘You are familiar with our rules,’ said the silky-voiced Vigilant.

‘You have been here before,’ the rasping one said. It was more of a statement than a question. Nayl stiffened.

‘I am a trader,’ said Preest. ‘I go where I please.’

‘Voice-pattern records show you to be Cynia Preest, shipmistress. Not Zeedmund.’

‘Traders change their identities. Is that a problem?’

‘Not at all. We are ever discreet,’ The Vigilants stood aside and ushered them through the threshold. ‘Enter and make your trade.’

Beyond the gate, they entered a capacious chamber hewn out of the planetary rock. The air was still muggy and over-used. The place was bathed in a yellow, fulminous light from bioluminescent tank-lamps mounted at regular intervals along the wall. Archways led off into other chambers, and at the far end, a well-lit tunnel disappeared away into the free trade areas. 

*** Culzean

ORFEO CULZEAN WAS a rare beast. His papers declared him to be a dealer and purveyor of antiquities, but that merely described the legitimate business he conducted to disguise his real work. It allowed him to travel widely through the sector, and availed him of opportunities to acquire curios and inspect the reserved collections of many museums and archives. His scholarship was highly regarded. He had not a single blemish of criminal activity on his record.

But Orfeo Culzean was a professional malcontent, a mercenary, a shaper of destiny. No warrior he – Culzean had never lifted a finger against another soul personally – his speciality was subtle and invidious. He made things happen. He was an architect of fate, one of the foremost expeditors employed by the Divine Fratery.

Culzean did not belong to the Fratery itself. He had no interest in being a seer, and bore no wish to sacrifice an eye or blister his skin. But it was he, and a few rare beasts like him, that the Fratery turned to when it wished to make its prospects into a reality.

Under normal circumstances, he would have been the most dangerous man alive on Eustis Majoris. But that winter, he was up against stiff opposition.

The Fratery had summoned him to Eustis Majoris, financed his passage, and paid for an exclusive suite at the Regency Viceroy in Formal C, at the heart of Petropolis. Two days after his arrival, the magus-clancular of the Divine Fratery cell active in Petropolis came to visit him.

The magus-clancular was called Cornelius Lezzard. He was three hundred and ten years old, infirm and riddled with disease, his crippled body supported in an upright exoskeleton. Two brothers of the Fratery escorted him. All three wore simple black suits with velvet hats. All three had moved their purple velvet eye patches to cover their everyday augmetic optics, so as to do Culzean the honour of regarding him with their sacred, real eyes.

What those eyes saw when they entered the opulent suite was a portly man in late middle age, dressed in a high-buttoned suit of blue worsted, his thick, dark hair and beard perfectly groomed. He was sitting in a leather armchair, caressing a little simivulpa that played on his lap. As the fraters came in, he put the pet down and got to his feet. The silky fox-monkey barked and clambered up to perch on the back of the chair.

Culzean bowed slightly.

‘Magus-clancular, a pleasure to meet you again,’ Culzean’s voice was as soft and heavy as comb honey.

‘We look upon you, Orfeo,’ Lezzard replied.

‘Please, repatch yourselves. Let us not stand on ceremony.’

The two escorts replaced their velvet patches over their organic eyes, exposing their crude, glowing augmetics.

One had to help Lezzard, who fumbled at his own patch with palsied hands.
‘Indeed they do. But tell me… this key?’

‘It choked a child on Gudrun.’

‘Did it? And this paving stone?’

‘Once lay at the very top of the processional steps outside the templum at Arnak. The glass vial beside it contains some of the rainwater that made it wet and treacherous to an unsuspecting pilgrim.’

‘Forgive me,’ one of the fraters – Arthous – said, ‘I don’t understand.’

Culzean smiled. ‘I collect deodands,’ he said.

Arthous looked bemused.

‘A deodand,’ Culzean said, ‘is an object that has directly caused the death of a person or persons. This tile, from the roof of an auction house on Durer, which cracked the skull of a passing magistrate. This ink pen, whose filthy nib poisoned the blood of the Administratum cleric who accidentally speared himself in the buttock. This thunderstone, falling like a missile from the open sky onto a herdsman in Migel County. This apple, sealed in a plastek block to preserve it – you notice the single bite mark? The poor woman was allergic to the juice.’

‘Extraordinary,’ said Arthous. ‘May I ask… why?’

‘Why do I collect them? Cherish them? You know what I do, Frater Arthous. 1 engineer destiny. These objects fascinate me. I believe they contain a vestige of some outer force, some happenstance. Each one crude, and of itself worthless, but empowered. I keep them by me as charms. Every single one has changed a person’s fate. They remind me how fickle and sudden fate can be, how easily twisted.’

‘They’re the source of your power?’ Stefoy wondered.

‘They’re just a collection of things,’ Culzean said. ‘All of them yearn to shape the future as completely and as fully as I do.’

*** Molotch


IT TOOK A certain sort of man to perform eight ritual killings in three hours, and he was, without doubt, that sort of man.

Each killing was random, opportunistic, each one carried out with wildly different methods and weapons. The first, with a purloined knife, looked like a back street mugging. The second, a strangulation, was made to seem like a sex crime. The third and fourth, together, would later appear to be a drunken argument over cards that ended with both parties shooting one another simultaneously. The fifth, a poisoning, would have any medicae examiner blaming poorly preserved shellfish. The sixth and seventh, also simultaneous, were electrocutions, and made faulty hab wiring seem responsible. The eighth, the most grisly, was staged to resemble a robbery gone wrong.

She finally caught up with him during the eighth murder. A local moneylender, and part-time fence, owned a house on the lower pavements behind the Basilica Mechanicus. He had slipped in through the back kitchen, found the moneylender alone in a shuttered study, and bludgeoned him to death with a votive statue of Saint Kiodrus.

Then he’d removed some paper money orders and gold bars from the moneylender’s floor safe to cement the notion of a robbery.



‘Dear Orfeo doesn’t really understand. I don’t know what he tells you he is, Leyla, but he’s a mercenary. A prostitute. Brilliant, skilled, talented… but he works for money. I don’t do what I do for money, or even power, as power is understood by the grandees of this Imperium of Man. I am, I suppose, a man of quite strong religious beliefs.’

‘You needed to give thanks?’ she asked, drinking a sip of water.

‘To the old gods I serve. I had to make appeasement, benediction. I had to make a sacrifice of thanks for deliverance, even though that meant risking discovery. A sacrifice must honour the eight, for eight is the symbol, eight-pointed. A common follower might have killed eight at the eighth house on the eighth street in the eighth enclave, at eight in the evening, but I eschew such crudity. The agents of the Throne would have recognised the occult significance in a moment. Even they are not that stupid. So I made eight subtle sacrifices that, according to inspection, would seem random and unconnected.’

‘But they still had ritual purpose?’

He nodded. He ate some more, and drank some wine. She refilled his glass. ‘The beggar in the alley I made eight incisions with a knife that weighed eight ounces. I did this at eight minutes to the hour. The housemaid had eight moles on her left thigh, and took eight minutes to suffocate. I was very particular. The gamblers both held double eights in their hands, and eight shots were discharged. And so on. The moneylender, killed at eight minutes past the hour, was slain with eight primary blows, no more, no less, and had been busy accounting the books for the eighth trading month. I anointed all the bodies with certain marks and runes, all made in water now long evaporated. It was ritual, Leyla. It was worship. It was not the act of a psychopath.’




Molotch removed a tiny phial from his sleeve and put it on the table top beside the cauldro of rice. ‘Osicol Plague, in suspension. I took it from Orfeo’s personal kit. If I release it here, I could decimate the entire city quarter.’

‘For the love of— No!’

‘I won’t. There’d be no sense in that. But consider the options. The banker at the table to our left. He works at the city mint. He has a brooch on his waistcoat, before you ask. The sigil of the banking guild, and the office of coinage circulation. If I dropped the phial into his business case, he would find it and open it when he returned to his office. The mint would be contaminated, and would have to be sealed off for fifteen years. The local currency would crash, and bring the subsector economy down. Decades of damage. Or take that young man over there, the one in the private booth. He’s the second son of a minor baron, slumming it, but I know he’s in with the court crowd.’

Molotch produced a small medical injector from his pocket and put it down on the table beside the phial. It was full of clear fluid. ‘Suspension liquid. Inert and viscous, metabolised in six hours. I could go into the washrooms, load the plague solution into it, and bump into that second son as I came back. In a day or two, the entire royal house of this planet would be dead from contact plague. An ideal moment to stage a coup.’

‘But that’s just… just…’ she whispered.

‘Now you’re getting the idea,’ he said. ‘What about this? That drunk by the bar. I’ve been gently hypnotising him with finger movements since we came in. Allow me to prove it.’

Molotch moved his fingers. The drunken man lurched and tottered over to them.

‘What’s your name?’ Molotch asked.

‘Sire Garnis Govior, sir,’ the man wobbled.

‘And your job?’

‘I am chief under translator to the House of the Governor, sir.’

Leyla stared at Molotch.

‘And you thought I’d let you pick this bar.’ he smiled. ‘It’s a famous haunt of the Administratum classes. I noticed Garnis here because of his signet ring.’

‘This ring?’ the man asked, displaying it so abruptly he swayed.

‘The very same. You have face time with the governor, then?’

‘I do, sir, I surely do.’ the man said, wobbling.

‘So, if I asked you to strangle him the next time you saw him, setting off a local sector war that would bring in Houses Gevaunt, Nightbray and Clovis, you’d have no problem?’

‘None at all,’ the man assured Molotch. ‘Not a problem at all.’

‘You’d strangle the Lord Governor?’ Leyla asked.

‘Like a bloody shot. Like he was a bloody whelp. Yes, mam.’

‘But I won’t,’ said Molotch. ‘You can go now, Garnis.’

‘Thank you kindly,’ the man said, and staggered off.

Molotch looked at the wide-eyed Leyla. ‘Every opening. Every chance. Every chink. That’s what the Cognitae are trained to do. To look, to see, to find, to use. In the course of this delightful lunch, Leyla, I could have brought the subsector down three or four times over. Just like that.’

He flicked something away with his thumb. It landed on the floor of the bar and broke, oozing fluid.

‘Oh holy-!’ Leyla began.

‘Relax. It’s just the suspension fluid. The plague’s in my pocket. So, let’s consider the Inquisition.’

‘The Inquisition?’

‘Most particularly, the office of the ordos on this world.’

‘You can’t see that from here.’

‘Oh, I can. In the over-bar mirror. See?’

‘Terra, I hadn’t noticed that.’

He sipped his wine. ‘I can see the fortress of the Inquisition from my seat. Such a big fortress. Towering over the city. It was built by the Black Templars, you know? Long since vacated, but one day they might be back. Until then, the Inquisition uses the keep. It’s going to be a bloody fight the day the Templars return. Anyway, they’re flying flags. Several dark flags. What does that mean?’

‘Does it mean anything? They’re flying flags.’

‘The Inquisition doesn’t suppose anyone understands their protocols and heraldry. Black flags above their fortress. Just for show. Just for threat. But I have made it my business to understand and monitor the way they signal to one another.’

‘So? I can barely see the mirror from where I’m sitting.’

‘I’ll tell you what it means. The flags are the black crests of Siquo, Bilocke and Quist, symbols the Inquisition identify with respect and honour. They are flying ceremonially. There are envoys in residence. Several high-ranking envoys. Actually, you can tell that simply by the number of weapon ports they’ve uncovered. Someone important is here.’

‘Meaning?’

‘Meaning, Ravenor’s here, as we feared, and they’ve decided to rein him in. Which is good news for us.’

There was a sudden, brutal crash. Voices around the eating house rose in alarm. Garnis had slipped over in the pool of suspension fluid and brained himself on the edge of the bar rail.

He was dead.

‘Let’s go,’ said Molotch.

They rose and picked their way out of the eating house, moving around the crowd that had gathered around Garnis’s misfortune.

‘That’s nine, ‘ Leyla whispered. ‘I thought you only wanted eight?’

‘I did, but I’m not stupid. This one isn’t ritual. This is a ninth to ruin the pattern. The ordos are sharp and clever. They would have seen a pattern of eight except for this.’

He bent down in the edge of the crowd and picked up a small piece of the broken glass phial Garnis had slipped on.

‘A present,’ he said. ‘A deodand for your master.’

‘I’m sure he’ll love it,’ said Leyla Slade. ‘Wait.’ she added.

*** Berynth


‘Every single hall in Berynth pays a retainer to the House in return for coherent information about new seams, stone beds and metal deposits. The jewellery business here is what Berynth is famous for, but it’s just a by-product of Berynth’s heavy industry. The first halls to set up here in the old days made their profits from the spoil of the intensive ore mining, but no one these days is going to sustain a business on accidental finds. Neither do the halls have the financial resources to maintain comprehensive mining operations of their own. So they pay to know where to look, and then hire out the mining complexes to do spot excavations. Everyone profits.’

‘It sounds very companionable.’

Yanvil shrugged. ‘The halls are very proprietorial about who gets access to the House. They vet. It’s an exclusive service. But then, Throne knows, you have to be pretty exclusive to come all this way to go jewellery shopping.’

‘How do they vet?’

‘You need to find an agent. They’re very exclusive too. They don’t advertise. A client hooks up with an agent, the agent takes them to an appropriate hall and makes an introduction. Then the client has to make a purchase, something pricy. Horologs are good, I hear. The purchase price is the hall’s fee. The client then gives the item to the agent as a gift. Later, the agent sells the item back to the hall for a cut of the fee. The item goes back in the hall’s display, and the hall’s made a tidy profit.’

*** Gereon


On the six hundred and fourth Day of Pain, the two hundred and twenty-first day of the Imperial Year 774, Gerome Landerson left his place of work at the sounding of the carnyx horn. The horn signalled the change from day-labour to night-labour.


Landerson walked on, trying to rub some life back into his soot-caked hands. He left the commercia via the wide flight of white marble steps, steps still riddled with the black boreholes of lasfire, and began down the Avenue of Shins. That wasn’t its real name of course, but the yoke of oppression bred black humour in the conquered. This had been the Avenue of the Aquila. Long and broad, it was lined on either side by rows of ouslite plinths. The statue of an Imperial hero had once stood on each. The invaders had demolished them all. Now only splintered stone shins rose from the proud feet planted on those plinths. Hence the name.

He was crossing the square at Tallenhall when he smelled the glyf. It stank like a discharged battery pack, an ionized scent, the tang of blood and metal. He huddled down in the overgrown hedge by the tangled iron railings and watched. The glyf appeared in the northern corner of the square, drifting like a balloon eight metres up, slow and lazy. As soon as he had located it, he tried to look away, but it was impossible. The floating sigils, bright as neon, locked his attention. He felt his stomach churn at the sight of those abominable, intertwined symbols, his gorge rising. At the back of his mind, he heard a chattering, like the sound of swarming insects rubbing their wing cases. The imago in the flesh of his left arm twitched.


“Voi shet!” a hard voice barked.

He shook his head, trying to straighten up. Boots crunched across the brick dust towards him.

“Voi shet! Ecchr Anark setriketan!”

Landerson raised his hands in supplication. “Consented! Consented, magir!”

The three excubitors surrounded him. Each was two metres tall and clad in heavy buckled boots and long coats of grey scale armour. They aimed their ornate las-locks at him.

“I am consented, magir!” he pleaded, trying to show them his imago.

One of them cuffed him down onto his knees.

“Shet atraga ydereta haspa? Voi leng haspa?”

“I… I don’t speak your—”

There was a click, and a crackle of vox noise. One of them spoke again, but its coarse words were obscured by a rasping mechanical echo.

“What is your purpose here?”

“I am consented to pass in daylight, magir,” he answered.

“Look at me!” Again, the barbarous tongue was overlaid with augmetically-generated speech.

Landerson looked up. The excubitor leaning over him was as hellish as any of its kind. Only the upper half of its head was visible — pale, shrivelled and hairless. A dripping cluster of metal tubes and pipes sprouted from the back of its wrinkled skull and connected to the steaming, panting support box strapped across its back. Three huge, sutured scars split its face, one down through each eye socket — in which augmetic ocular mounts were now sewn — and the third straight down over the bridge of a nose from which all flesh had been debrided. A large brass collar rose in front of the face, mercifully obscuring the excubitor’s mouth and most of the nasal area. The front of this collar mounted a wire-grilled speaking box, which the excubitor had switched to “translate”.

“I… I look upon you, and I am graced by your beauty,” Landerson gasped as clearly as he could.

“Name?” the thing snapped.

“Landerson, Gerome, consented of day, b-by the will of the Anarch.”

“Place of industry?”

“The Iconoclave, magir.”

“You work in the Breaking House?”

“Yes, magir.”

“Display to me your consent!”

Landerson lifted his left arm and drew back the sleeve of his torn workcoat to reveal the imago in its blister of clear pus.

“Eletraa kyh drowk!” the excubitor said to one of its companions.

“Chee ataah drowk,” came the reply. The sentinel drew a long metal tool from its belt, the size and shape of a candle-snuffer, and placed the cup over Landerson’s imago. Landerson gasped as he felt the thing in his flesh writhe. Small runes lit up on the shank of the tool. The cup withdrew.

The third excubitor grabbed Landerson by the head and turned it roughly so as to better examine the stigma on his left cheek.

“Fehet gahesh,” it said, letting him go.

“Go home, interceded one,” the first excubitor told Landerson, the machine words back-echoed by the alien speech. “Go home and do not let us catch you out here again.”

“Y-yes, magir. At once.”

“Or we will have sport with you. Us, or the wirewolves.”

“I understand, magir. Thank you.”

The excubitor stepped back. It covered the grille of its speaking box with one hand. Its brethren did the same.

“We serve the word of the Anarch, whose word drowns out all others.”

Landerson covered his own mouth quickly. “Whose word drowns out all others,” he repeated quickly.

The excubitors looked at him for a moment longer, then shouldered their massive las-locks and walked away across the overgrown square.

It was a long while before Landerson had recovered enough to get back on his feet.




In the dark, the glyf was even more terrifying than the one that had passed Landerson by in daylight. Its coiled, burning symbols seemed to writhe like snakes, forming one unholy rune then another, bright against the night sky as if they were written in liquid flame. Landerson could hear it crackling like a log fire. He could hear the thick, nauseating insect noise. This time, he managed to look away.

He was suddenly aware of Lefivre next to him. The man was shaking badly. Glancing round, Landerson saw that his companion had his eyes locked on the infernal glyf. Tears were trickling from eyes that refused to blink. Landerson reached out quickly and took Lefivre’s weapon just moments before it slithered out of the man’s nerveless hands. In the half light, he could see Lefivre’s jaw working and his adam’s apple bobbing. Lefivre’s lips were pinched and white. He was fighting not to scream, but it was a fight he was about to lose.

Landerson clamped his hand over Lefivre’s mouth. Realising what was happening, Purchason grabbed Lefivre too, hugging him tight to keep him upright and pin his arms. Landerson felt Lefivre’s mouth grind open, and squeezed his hand tighter, fighting back a cry as Lefivre’s teeth bit into his palm.

The glyf trembled. The insect noise increased, purring, then sank away. The glyf drifted off to the north, hissing over the shattered roofs of the hab terrace and then away across the park. Landerson and Purchason maintained their grip on Lefivre. Ten seconds later, five excubitors ran past along the lane, heading towards the town. The glyf had found something, and now the patrol was drawing in. After a few minutes, they heard the dull bark of las-locks discharging.

Some poor unconsented, no doubt, hiding in the rambles of the park.

Landerson realised he was now unconsented too.


Ordinals led the parade towards the temple. Landerson had told Gaunt that “ordinals” was a blanket term for the senior administrators of the enemy power. Some were priests, others scholars, bureaucrats, financiers, merchants. They wore elaborately coloured robes and headdresses, and their be-ringed fingers hefted ornate staves and ceremonial maces. Some were female, some male, others indeterminate, and many displayed horrifying mutation traits. Gaunt couldn’t tell — didn’t want to tell — what the variations in dress and decoration denoted. They were all enemies. But they intrigued him nevertheless. In his career, he had faced the warriors and the devotees of the Ruinous Powers in many guises, but this was the first time he had properly laid eyes on the dignitaries and officials who ordered their culture and society. These were the fiends who followed the smouldering wake of battle and established rule and control over the territories conquered by their warrior hosts.


Once the parade had passed, the three men hurried on into the low pavements where the town’s administratum buildings had once stood. Here, the faces of the broken walls and chipped plasterwork were covered with paint daubs and scribbles that made nonsense words and strange designs. In one large square, lit by fierce bonfires, hundreds of human slaves laboured under the attentive guns of excubitor squads. The slaves, some on makeshift ladders, were painting more designs on the open walls.

“Petitioners,” Landerson whispered. “Or criminals trying to atone for minor infractions. They labour day and night until they either drop of exhaustion, or make a mark that is deemed true.”

“True?” Mkoll echoed.

“The enemy does not teach its signs and symbols, except to the converted. It is said they believe that those touched with Chaos will know the marks instinctively. So the petitioners make random marks, scribing anything and everything their imagination comes up with. If they make any mark or sign that the ordinals recognise, they are taken away for purification and conversion.”

Amongst the gangs of excubitors, three ordinals lurked, overseeing the insane graffiti. One of them sat astride a mechanical hobbyhorse, a bizarre machine whose body rose above its small wheels on four thin, strut-like legs. The ordinal trundled around on his high perch, shouting orders. He looked like a child with a nursery plaything, as dreamed up in a nightmare. There was nothing childish about the twin stubber pintle-mounted in place of the hobbyhorse’s head, though.



The pheguth shrugged. The ethnologue bemused him. Not as a person — she was a grotesque monster, and that was bafflement enough. No, it was her purpose. It was her duty to learn in all detail about the life and culture of the enemy. That’s what she’d told him on the dam. She asked him curious questions like:

“How does a man make the sign of the aquila, and what does it represent?”

or

“Eggs, when fried, are popular amongst men of the Imperium, are they not?”

or

“How old must an Imperial child be before he or she is considered fit for military service?”

or

“Explain simply the financial mechanisms of the Munitorum.”


Cluwge was an instrument in that subtle war. She asked the questions that were unanswerable during the heat of combat. She asked about the little details, the small particulars of Imperial life. The hosts of the Archon might crush the warriors of the Imperium, might drive them to rout, but Cluwge’s understanding offered them true mastery. Defeating the enemy was one thing. Comprehending the workings of its society so that it might be controlled and suppressed — that was quite another.

Idresha Cluwge was a tool of domination. What she learned informed the higher powers and armed them for rule.

There was nothing about him that was at all intimidating or frightening, and that’s why he terrified the pheguth. This little man was surrounded by monsters— a veritable minotaur held a black parasol over his head deferentially — and massive Chaos Marines paid him fealty, yet there was no visible clue to his source of power. He was just a little man under a parasol.

“Welcome, pheguth,” the Plenipotentiary said. His voice was like a sharp knife slicing satin.

“Magir magus,” the pheguth responded as he had been rehearsed, bowing.

“There are two persons I would like you to meet,” said the Plenipotentiary. “You will be spending a lot of time with them in the next few months.”





The pheguth smiled. “I didn’t catch your name, sir,” he said.

“I am Mabbon Etogaur. The etogaur is an honorific.”

“I know,” said the pheguth. “It’s a rank name. The Guard had pretty damn good intelligence. It’s indicative of a colonel rank or its equivalent.”

“Yes, sir, it is. General, actually.”

“It’s a Blood Pact rank.”

Mabbon nodded. “Indeed.”

“But you present to me unmasked and your hands are clean of rite scars.”

Mabbon pulled his glove back on. “You appreciate a great deal.”

“I was a general too, you know.”

“I know.”

“And you’re going to be talking to me?”

Mabbon nodded.

“I look forward to it, sir. I wonder if at some point we might explore the meaning of the word ‘pheguth’.”

Mabbon looked away. “If needs be, that might happen,”

The pheguth looked back at the Plenipotentiary.

“Are we done?” he asked.

“Not even slightly, pheguth,” the magir magus replied. “Nine worlds in the Anarch’s domain lack water sources. They are parched, thirsty. Today, here, we conduct a ceremony that will access Gereon’s resources to aid them. The process has already been done at four sites on the planet already. I wanted you to oversee this one.”

“Another test of my resolve?”

“Of course another test. Wards, bring the cylinder.”

With Desolane and the minotaur at their heels, the Plenipotentiary led him to the wall of the dam overlooking the vast reservoir beyond.

“Eight billion cubic metres of fresh water, replenished on a three-day cycle. Do you know what a jehgenesh is?”

“No, magir magus, I don’t.”

Isidor smiled. “Literally, a ‘drinker of seas’. That’s quite accurate. It leaves out the warp-fold part, but other than that…”

Two goat-headed servants clopped up to the wall, and held out a glass canister in which about three litres of green fluid sloshed. Deep in the fluid suspension, the pheguth could see something writhing.

Isidor Sek Incarnate took the cylinder and handed it to the pheguth. “Don’t be misled by its current size. It’s dormant and infolded. Released into the water, it will grow. Essentially, it’s a huge maw. On one end, flooding in, this water source. The jehgenesh is a warp beast. The water that pours into its mouth will be ejected through the holy warp onto another world. The arid basins of Anchisus Bone, for example.”

The pheguth gazed at the cylinder in his hands. “This is how you plunder?”

“It is one way amongst many.”

“But this is why so many worlds we find have been drained?”

The Plenipotentiary nodded. “The drinkers swallow water, also fuel oil, promethium, certain gas reserves. Why would we conquer worlds if we didn’t actually use them? I mean, literally, use them?”


*** Tantalid

AS I WORKED my way back to health, I considered Tantalid. Arnaut Tantalid had risen from the rank of confessor militant in the Missionaria Galaxia seventy years before to become one of the Ministorum’s most feared and ruthless witch-hunters. Like many of his breed, he followed the doctrines of Sebastian Thor with such unswerving precision it bordered on clinical obsession.

To most of the common folk of the Imperium, there would be blessed little to choose between an Ordo Xenos inquisitor such as myself and an ecclesiarchy witchkiller like Tantalid. We both hunt out the damning darkness that stalks mankind, we are both figures of fear and dread, we are both, so it seems, laws unto ourselves.

Twinned though we may be in so many ways, we could not be more distinct. It is my personal belief that the Adeptus Ministorum, the Imperium’s vast organ of faith and worship, should focus its entire attention on the promulgation of the true church of the God-Emperor and leave the persecution of heretics to the Inquisition. Our jurisdictions often clash. There have, to my certain knowledge, been two wars of faith in the last century provoked and sustained by just such rivalry.

Tantalid and I had locked horns twice before. On Bradell’s World, five decades earlier, we had faced each other across the marble floor of a synod court, arguing for the right to extradite the psyker Elbone Parsuval. On that occasion, he had triumphed, thanks mainly to the strict Thorian mindset of the Ministorum elders of Bradell’s World.

Then, just eight years ago, our paths had crossed again on Kuuma.

Tantalid’s fanatical hatred – indeed, I would venture, fear – of the psyker was by then insurmountable. I made no secret of the fact that I employed psychic methods in the pursuit of my work. There were psychic adepts in my staff, and I myself had worked to develop my own psychic abilities over the years. Such is my right, as an authorised bearer of the Inquisition’s seal.

In my eyes, he was a blinkered zealot with psychotic streak. In his, I was the spawn of witches and a heretic.

No courtroom argument for us on Kuuma. A little war instead. It lasted an afternoon, and raged through the tiered streets of the oasis town at Unat Akim.

Twenty-eight latent psykers, none older than fourteen, had been rooted out of the population of Kuuma’s sprawling capital city during a purge, and sequestered prior to their collection by the Black Ships. They were recruits, a precious resource, untainted and ready to be shaped by the Adeptus Astropathicus into worthy servants of the God-Emperor. Some of them, perhaps, would have the ultimate honour of joining the choir of the Astronomican. They were frightened and confused, but this was their salvation.

Better to be found early and turned to good service than to remain undetected and become tainted, corrupt and a threat to our entire society.

But before the Black Ships could arrive to take them, they were spirited away by renegade slavers working in collusion with corrupt officials in the local Administratum. Vast sums could be made on the black market for unregistered, virgin psychic slaves.

I followed the slavers’ trail across the seif dunes to Unat Akim with the intention of liberating the youngsters. Tantalid made his way there to exterminate them all as witches.

By the end of the fight, I had driven the witchfinder and his cohorts, mostly foot soldiers of the Frateris Militia, out of the oasis town. Two of the young psykers had been killed in the crossfire, but the others were safely transferred into the hands of the Astropathicus.

Tantalid, fleeing Kuuma to lick his wounds, had tried to have me declared heretic, but the charges were swiftly overturned. The Ministorum had, at that time, no wish to court conflict with their allies in the Inquisition.

I had expected, known even, that Tantalid would return sometime to plague me. It was a personal matter now, one which his fanatical disposition would fix upon and transform into a holy calling.

But the last I had heard, he had been leading an ecclesiarchy mission into the Ophidian sub-sector in support of the century-long Purge Campaign there.

I wondered what had brought him to Lethe Eleven at so inopportune a moment.




Politics left me cold, and I seldom empathised with political ambitions. I only studied the subject because my duties often demanded a detailed working knowledge. Imperial Lord Commander Helican, which is to say Jeromya Faurlitz IV of the noble Imperial family Faurlitz, was the supreme secular authority in the Helican sub-sector, for which reason he styled himself with the sub-sector’s name in his appellation. On paper, even the cardinals of the Ministorium, the Grandmaster of the Inquisition, the senior luminaries of the Administratum and the Lords Militant had to answer to him, though as with all things in Imperial society, it was never as easy as that. Church, state and military, woven together as one, yet constantly inimical. In favouring Warmaster Honorius with the Bestowment, Lord Helican was throwing his lot in with the military – an overt signal to the other organs of government – and clearly expected the Warmaster to return the favour when he rose to levels of government beyond those of a single sub-sector. It was a dangerous game, and rare for so senior an official to play openly for such an advantage, though the battle-glory that surrounded Honorius made a perfect excuse.

And that made it a dangerous time. Somebody would want to redress that balance. My money would be on the Ecclesiarchy, though it’s fair to say I’m biased. However, history has shown the Church to be chronically intolerant of losing power to the military or the state. I said as much.

‘There are many other elements,’ Aemos chuckled, accepting a refill of dessert wine. ‘The Faurlitz line is weak and lacks both support in the Adeptus Terra and a ready ear at the Senatorum Imperialis and the courts of the Golden Throne. Two powerful families, the De Vensii and the Fulvatorae, are seeking to make gains against the Faurlitz, and would take this as an open show of defiance. Then there’s the House of Eirswald, who see their own famous son, Lord Militant Strefon, as the only viable replacement for Hiju. And the Augustyn dynasty, let’s not forget, who were ousted from power when High Lord of Terra Giann Augustyn died in office forty years ago. They’ve been trying to get back in with feverish determination these last few years, pushing their candidate, Lord Commander Cosimo, with almost unseemly impudence. If Nayl’s right and the Bestowment makes Honorius a certainty as Hiju’s successor, he’d become a direct competitor with Cosimo for the High Lord’s vacant position.’





PIECES NOW FELL into place. The sheer scale of the triumph celebrations, the magnitude of the Novena, were appropriate enough, but the number of senior inquisitors summoned to attend was heavy handed to say the least. Military and Ecclesiarch luminaries may be ordered around to swell such events, but inquisitors are a different breed, more aloof, more... independent. It is unusual for us to be called together in any great gathering, particularly by such incontestable orders. I had presumed Orsini was throwing his weight around to impress the Lord Commander Helican.

But that was not the case. There was to be an Apotropaic Congress. That is why we had been called here.

Apotropaic studies are conducted all the time by the Inquisition, and usually involve one or perhaps as many as three inquisitors. On a larger scale, they are named Councils, and require a quorum of at least eleven inquisitors. Larger than that, they become a Congress. Such assemblies are extremely rare. I knew for a fact that my late master Hapshant had served on the last such Congress held in the sub-sector. That was two hundred and seventy-nine years in the past.

The purpose of these studies, even at their smallest level, is the acute examination and assessment of unusually valuable captives. Once in the custody of the Inquisition, a rogue psyker, a charismatic heretic, an alien warlord... whatever... undergoes a sometimes lengthy formal examination quite separate from the dissection of his or her actual crimes. They are often already condemned and only waiting for sentence to be carried out. At that stage, the Inquisition wishes to expand its own learning, to understand more precisely the nature of the enemies of mankind. The subjects are dissected, usually intellectually, sometimes psychically and occasionally literally, in order to discover their strengths, weaknesses, beliefs and drives. Vital truths have in this way been discovered by Apotropaic councils, truths that have armoured the servants of the Imperium for later clashes. To illustrate, the Imperial Guard’s famous victory over the Ezzel meta-breed was only successful thanks to methods of detecting their presence discovered by the examination of an Ezzel scoutform by the Apotropaic Council of Adiemus Ultima in 883.M40.

The size of the inquiry depends on the number or magnitude of the subject.

‘Thirty-three heretic psykers of level alpha or above were captured by the Warmaster at Dolsene, during the final major engagement of the Ophidian Suppression,’ Rorken told me, showing me a data-slate. The security clearance on the slate was so high that even I was impressed. ‘Trained, somehow, to control and master the warp-spawned filth they channel, they formed the backbone of the Enemy’s high command defence, the beating heart of the adversary.’


