* A Socio-Institutional Approach to Action
Towards a strategic capability for abuse of power in dynamic, embodied, social characters.

** Forms of action
Potentially through the application of naive bayes learning and
classification to decision making for understanding social
norms. Using the naive bayes to classify potential actions into
social, unsocial categories, using preannotated culture tags as the features.
then steadily retraining as the agent experiences more and more.


CiF and Praxis both assume agents that interact will 'play the same
game' so to speak. An agent, in their decision process, is assuming
that not only is there a set of rules governing a social practice, but
that social practice is the same between players.

i) There are a set of rules that govern Chess, Q in Agent A's mind.
    There are a set of rules that govern Backgammon, R, in Agent B's mind.
    if R = Q, A and B can play together.

What happens if we then define the games further:

ii) There are a tuple of Rules and Actions for Chess, (Q,T) in Agent A's mind.
    There are a tuple of Rules and Actions for Backgammon, (R,S) in Agent B's mind.
    if (Q,T) = (R,S) then A and B can play
    if Q = R but T != S 
    or Q != R but T = S, (either rules or actions are the same) then with clarification, 
                         adjudication, or translation, A and B can play.

Games, even with different names, can be played if the rules and actions are able to be aligned.

iii) Let N be a metric for the similarity of Q and R in the range of 0 - 1.
     Let M be a metric for the similarity of T and S in the range of 0 - 1.
     Then as N (and? or?) M -> 0, A and B become unable to play.
     As N (and? or?) M -> 1, A and B become able to play.

Conversely, through a set of strategies, there can be a reduction of
rule and action set alignment. This would reduce or remove the ability
to allow play.

In between these two 'extremes' of playing a shared game, and not
playing, there is a grey area where the rules are in a state of
uncertainty and conflict.  If the agents are socially aware, and
capable of playing more than one game, at which they might be better
at one than another, they can attempt to ensure the clarification of a
game resolves to a game they are better at than another.

Now instead of focusing on entire games, let the clarification be a
certain amount of construction of the game from rule and action
fragments. 









